## âœ… Java 8 Coding Interview Questions with Answers

### 1. **What is a lambda expression? Write a basic example.**

**Answer:**

A lambda expression is a **short block of code** which takes in
parameters and returns a value. Lambda expressions are similar to
methods, but they do not need a name and can be implemented right in the
body of a method.

**Syntax:**

java

CopyEdit

(parameter1, parameter2) -\> { //body }

**Example:**

java

CopyEdit

List\<String\> list = Arrays.asList(\"A\", \"B\", \"C\");

list.forEach(s -\> System.out.println(s));

### 2. **Write a Java 8 program to print even numbers from a list.**

**Answer:**

java

CopyEdit

List\<Integer\> numbers = Arrays.asList(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6);

numbers.stream()

.filter(n -\> n % 2 == 0)

.forEach(System.out::println);

### 3. **How do you convert a list of Strings to uppercase using streams?**

**Answer:**

java

CopyEdit

List\<String\> names = Arrays.asList(\"raj\", \"amit\", \"neha\");

List\<String\> upperNames = names.stream()

.map(String::toUpperCase)

.collect(Collectors.toList());

System.out.println(upperNames);

### 4. **What is a functional interface? Give an example.**

**Answer:**

A functional interface is an interface that contains only **one abstract
method**.

**Example:**

java

CopyEdit

\@FunctionalInterface

interface MyFunctionalInterface {

void sayHello();

}

You can implement it using a lambda:

java

CopyEdit

MyFunctionalInterface greet = () -\> System.out.println(\"Hello!\");

greet.sayHello();

### 5. **What is the use of** Optional **in Java 8?**

**Answer:**\
Optional is a container object used to contain **not-null objects**. It
is used to avoid NullPointerException.

**Example:**

java

CopyEdit

Optional\<String\> name = Optional.of(\"Raj\");

name.ifPresent(System.out::println);

### 6. **Find the first non-repeated character in a string using Java 8.**

**Answer:**

java

CopyEdit

String input = \"programming\";

Character result = input.chars()

.mapToObj(c -\> (char) c)

.collect(Collectors.groupingBy(c -\> c, LinkedHashMap::new,
Collectors.counting()))

.entrySet()

.stream()

.filter(entry -\> entry.getValue() == 1)

.map(Map.Entry::getKey)

.findFirst()

.orElse(null);

System.out.println(result); // \'p\'

### 7. **How to sort a list of employees by salary using streams?**

**Answer:**

java

CopyEdit

List\<Employee\> employees = Arrays.asList(

new Employee(\"John\", 3000),

new Employee(\"Jane\", 4000),

new Employee(\"Alex\", 2500)

);

employees.stream()

.sorted(Comparator.comparing(Employee::getSalary))

.forEach(e -\> System.out.println(e.getName() + \": \" +
e.getSalary()));

### 8. **What is method reference in Java 8? Give examples.**

**Answer:**\
Method reference is a shorthand notation of a lambda expression to call
a method.

**Syntax:**

java

CopyEdit

ClassName::methodName

**Example:**

java

CopyEdit

List\<String\> list = Arrays.asList(\"A\", \"B\", \"C\");

list.forEach(System.out::println); // instead of s -\>
System.out.println(s)

### 9. **Count number of words in a sentence using streams.**

**Answer:**

java

CopyEdit

String sentence = \"Java 8 makes coding easy\";

long count = Arrays.stream(sentence.split(\" \"))

.count();

System.out.println(\"Word count: \" + count);

### 10. **How to check if a string contains only digits using Java 8?**

**Answer:**

java

CopyEdit

String input = \"123456\";

boolean isDigitOnly = input.chars().allMatch(Character::isDigit);

System.out.println(isDigitOnly); // true

## ðŸ”„ Want More?

Let me know if you want:

- Real-world scenario-based Java 8 coding tasks

- More advanced Stream API questions

- Java 8 + Spring Boot questions

Would you like 50 or 100 Java 8 coding interview questions in a PDF or
list format?

##### You said:

Yes

###### ChatGPT said:

Updated saved memory

Great! I'll prepare a list of **50--100 Java 8 coding interview
questions** with answers and examples, covering:

- âœ… Lambda expressions

- âœ… Stream API

- âœ… Functional interfaces

- âœ… Optional

- âœ… Method references

- âœ… Collectors

- âœ… Date and Time API

- âœ… Real-time coding challenges

I\'ll provide this as a structured **PDF** and also as a readable list
here. You'll be able to download and use it for interview prep or team
practice.

ðŸ“Œ **ETA:** Would you prefer I share it in:

- ðŸ“„ PDF format only?

- ðŸ“ƒ List format here and PDF both?

Also, do you want the questions to be:

- For **intermediate** (3--6 years)?

- For **senior level** (8--12 years)?

Let me know so I tailor it properly for you.

##### You said:

explain those with examples : âœ… Lambda expressions âœ… Stream API âœ…
Functional interfaces âœ… Optional âœ… Method references âœ… Collectors âœ…
Date and Time API âœ… Real-time coding challenges

###### ChatGPT said:

Absolutely! Below is a detailed explanation of **Java 8 key features**
with **syntax**, **examples**, and **use cases**, followed by some
**real-time coding challenges**.

## âœ… 1. Lambda Expressions

### ðŸ”¹ What it is:

Lambda expressions allow you to create **anonymous functions**. They
enable **functional programming** and reduce boilerplate code.

### ðŸ”¹ Syntax:

java

CopyEdit

(parameters) -\> expression

### ðŸ”¹ Example:

java

CopyEdit

List\<String\> names = Arrays.asList(\"Raj\", \"Amit\", \"Neha\");

names.forEach(name -\> System.out.println(name));

### ðŸ”¹ Use Case:

Replacing anonymous inner classes for functional interfaces like
Runnable, Comparator, etc.

## âœ… 2. Stream API

### ðŸ”¹ What it is:

Stream API processes **collections in a functional style**. You can
chain operations like **filter, map, reduce**.

### ðŸ”¹ Example:

java

CopyEdit

List\<Integer\> numbers = Arrays.asList(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6);

numbers.stream()

.filter(n -\> n % 2 == 0)

.map(n -\> n \* n)

.forEach(System.out::println); // Prints 4, 16, 36

### ðŸ”¹ Use Case:

Processing large collections easily with **less code and better
performance** using lazy evaluation.

## âœ… 3. Functional Interfaces

### ðŸ”¹ What it is:

An interface with **only one abstract method**. Used as the basis for
lambda expressions.

### ðŸ”¹ Example:

java

CopyEdit

\@FunctionalInterface

interface MyInterface {

void show();

}

public class Test {

public static void main(String\[\] args) {

MyInterface obj = () -\> System.out.println(\"Hello from Lambda!\");

obj.show();

}

}

### ðŸ”¹ Built-in Functional Interfaces:

- Predicate\<T\>

- Function\<T, R\>

- Consumer\<T\>

- Supplier\<T\>

## âœ… 4. Optional

### ðŸ”¹ What it is:

Optional is a container that may or may not contain a non-null value.
Helps prevent NullPointerException.

### ðŸ”¹ Example:

java

CopyEdit

Optional\<String\> name = Optional.ofNullable(getName());

name.ifPresent(System.out::println); // Only prints if not null

### ðŸ”¹ Use Case:

Avoid explicit null checks and write cleaner code when dealing with
possibly null values.

## âœ… 5. Method References

### ðŸ”¹ What it is:

A shorthand for lambda expressions that **refer to a method** without
executing it.

### ðŸ”¹ Syntax:

java

CopyEdit

ClassName::methodName

### ðŸ”¹ Example:

java

CopyEdit

List\<String\> list = Arrays.asList(\"A\", \"B\", \"C\");

list.forEach(System.out::println); // instead of s -\>
System.out.println(s)

## âœ… 6. Collectors

### ðŸ”¹ What it is:

Part of java.util.stream.Collectors, used to **collect stream output**
into a collection or string, map, count, etc.

### ðŸ”¹ Example:

java

CopyEdit

List\<String\> list = Arrays.asList(\"apple\", \"banana\", \"apple\");

Map\<String, Long\> frequencyMap = list.stream()

.collect(Collectors.groupingBy(Function.identity(),
Collectors.counting()));

System.out.println(frequencyMap); // {banana=1, apple=2}

### ðŸ”¹ Common Collectors:

- toList()

- toSet()

- toMap()

- joining()

- groupingBy()

- partitioningBy()

## âœ… 7. Date and Time API (java.time)

### ðŸ”¹ What it is:

New date/time API introduced in Java 8 in package java.time (immutable,
thread-safe).

### ðŸ”¹ Example:

java

CopyEdit

LocalDate today = LocalDate.now();

LocalDate birthday = LocalDate.of(1990, Month.JULY, 15);

Period age = Period.between(birthday, today);

System.out.println(\"Age: \" + age.getYears());

### ðŸ”¹ Common Classes:

- LocalDate, LocalTime, LocalDateTime

- Period, Duration

- DateTimeFormatter

## âœ… 8. Real-Time Coding Challenges

### ðŸ”¹ 1. **Find duplicate elements in a list using Java 8**

java

CopyEdit

List\<Integer\> list = Arrays.asList(1, 2, 3, 2, 4, 3);

Set\<Integer\> duplicates = list.stream()

.collect(Collectors.groupingBy(Function.identity(),
Collectors.counting()))

.entrySet().stream()

.filter(e -\> e.getValue() \> 1)

.map(Map.Entry::getKey)

.collect(Collectors.toSet());

System.out.println(duplicates); // \[2, 3\]

### ðŸ”¹ 2. **Find the highest salary employee**

java

CopyEdit

Employee emp = employees.stream()

.max(Comparator.comparing(Employee::getSalary))

.orElse(null);

### ðŸ”¹ 3. **Group employees by department**

java

CopyEdit

Map\<String, List\<Employee\>\> deptMap = employees.stream()

.collect(Collectors.groupingBy(Employee::getDepartment));

### ðŸ”¹ 4. **Convert List\<String\> to comma-separated String**

java

CopyEdit

List\<String\> items = Arrays.asList(\"Java\", \"Spring\", \"AWS\");

String result = items.stream().collect(Collectors.joining(\", \"));

System.out.println(result); // Java, Spring, AWS

### ðŸ”¹ 5. **Find First Non-Repeating Character in a String**

java

CopyEdit

String input = \"programming\";

Character result = input.chars()

.mapToObj(c -\> (char) c)

.collect(Collectors.groupingBy(c -\> c, LinkedHashMap::new,
Collectors.counting()))

.entrySet().stream()

.filter(entry -\> entry.getValue() == 1)

.map(Map.Entry::getKey)

.findFirst().orElse(null);

System.out.println(result); // \'p\'

## âœ… 1. Predicate\<T\>

### ðŸ”¹ Description:

Represents a function that accepts a single input argument and returns a
**boolean** result.

java

CopyEdit

\@FunctionalInterface

public interface Predicate\<T\> {

boolean test(T t);

}

### ðŸ”¹ Example:

java

CopyEdit

Predicate\<String\> isLongerThan5 = str -\> str.length() \> 5;

System.out.println(isLongerThan5.test(\"Java\")); // false

System.out.println(isLongerThan5.test(\"Predicate\")); // true

### ðŸ”¹ Use Case:

- Filtering lists

- Conditional validations

java

CopyEdit

List\<String\> names = Arrays.asList(\"Raj\", \"Neha\", \"Prakash\",
\"Tom\");

names.stream()

.filter(name -\> name.length() \> 3)

.forEach(System.out::println);

## âœ… 2. Function\<T, R\>

### ðŸ”¹ Description:

Represents a function that takes an argument of type **T** and returns a
result of type **R**.

java

CopyEdit

\@FunctionalInterface

public interface Function\<T, R\> {

R apply(T t);

}

### ðŸ”¹ Example:

java

CopyEdit

Function\<String, Integer\> lengthFunction = s -\> s.length();

System.out.println(lengthFunction.apply(\"Function\")); // 8

### ðŸ”¹ Use Case:

- Data transformation

- Mapping operations

java

CopyEdit

List\<String\> names = Arrays.asList(\"Java\", \"Spring\", \"Cloud\");

List\<Integer\> lengths = names.stream()

.map(name -\> name.length())

.collect(Collectors.toList());

System.out.println(lengths); // \[4, 6, 5\]

## âœ… 3. Consumer\<T\>

### ðŸ”¹ Description:

Represents an operation that accepts a single input argument and returns
**no result** (i.e., a side-effect action).

java

CopyEdit

\@FunctionalInterface

public interface Consumer\<T\> {

void accept(T t);

}

### ðŸ”¹ Example:

java

CopyEdit

Consumer\<String\> printConsumer = str -\> System.out.println(\"Hello
\" + str);

printConsumer.accept(\"Raj\"); // Hello Raj

### ðŸ”¹ Use Case:

- Logging

- Printing/output operations

- Updating values

java

CopyEdit

List\<String\> names = Arrays.asList(\"Java\", \"8\", \"Features\");

names.forEach(name -\> System.out.println(\"Name: \" + name));

## âœ… 4. Supplier\<T\>

### ðŸ”¹ Description:

Represents a supplier of results. It does **not take any input** but
returns a result of type **T**.

java

CopyEdit

\@FunctionalInterface

public interface Supplier\<T\> {

T get();

}

### ðŸ”¹ Example:

java

CopyEdit

Supplier\<String\> messageSupplier = () -\> \"Hello from Supplier!\";

System.out.println(messageSupplier.get());

### ðŸ”¹ Use Case:

- Generating values

- Lazy loading

- Object creation

java

CopyEdit

Supplier\<List\<String\>\> listSupplier = ArrayList::new;

List\<String\> names = listSupplier.get();

names.add(\"Java\");

System.out.println(names); // \[Java\]

## ðŸ”š Summary Table:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Interface**     **Method**   **Input**   **Output**   **Use Case**
  ----------------- ------------ ----------- ------------ ---------------------------------
  Predicate\<T\>    test()       T           boolean      Filter, condition checks

  Function\<T,R\>   apply()      T           R            Transforming data (String â†’
                                                          Integer etc.)

  Consumer\<T\>     accept()     T           void         Display, logging, side-effect
                                                          operations

  Supplier\<T\>     get()        none        T            Data generation, lazy loading
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
